		Instructions for using the shotgun sequencing simulator
				Eyal Mozes

This directory contains command files for using a simulation program
that simulates copy-number variations and shotgun sequencing over the
human genome (downloaded from http://hgdownload.cse.ucsc.edu), and
results from a sample run of this program. To use the program, copy
files runSimulation and params to your own directory, and edit params
to make any desired changes to the parameters.

To run the simulation program, use command

	runSimulation

The program reads file params to get its parameters; performs a number of
random copy-number variations in the reference genome; and then simulates
shotgun-sequencing reads. The program outputs are the results of the
simulated reads, and a list of the simulated copy-number variations.

After running the simulation, the results can be used as input to
Maq to check how the simulated reads would be mapped to the reference
genome. Command-file runMaq contains an example of the commands for
running the mapping. The human-readable outputs of th Maqe mapping run in this
example are

	- results.map.txt, the output of maq mapview, listing the mappings
	of all reads in text format
	- pileup.output, a condensed form of the output of maq pileup,
	showing the coverage at each location on the genome
	- runmaq.log, the log output of the maq map runs

The file "params" parameters for creating variations, shotgun sequencing,
incorporating SNPs, and for the output format. Parameters are as follows:

	Chromosome ID1 ID2 ....

If this line is included in the params file, the program does not run
over the entire reference genome, but only over the chromosomes listed
in this line. The line should contain one or more chromosome ids (a
chromosome id is X, Y, or a number between 1 and 22), and the simulated
variations and reads are done only over the listed chromosomes. The
default is to run the simulation over the entire genome.

Creating variations

The simulator allows two methods of creating variation; random creation,
or choosing from a list of common variations. The example in this
directory is of a run in which a list of common variations was used.

To use a list of common variations, the params file should contain
the line

	commonVariations N file1 file2 ...

The line provides a list of files containing a list of common variations;
the simulator will choose a total of N variations at random from all these
fils. If a list of chromosomes was specified, only variations in these
chromosomes can be chosen. A variation of type "InDel" or "CopyNumber" is
treated as either a duplication or a deletion with equal probability. If
a variation in the same location happens to be chosen more than once,
the variation in that location is made homozygous.

Alternatively, to create variations randonly, use one or more of the
following lines:

	duplications N1

	deletions N2

	inversions N3

The simulator then the specified number of each type of variation. Any
types that are not specified are not created (e.g. if only the "deletions"
line is specified, the simulator will create deletions only). If none of
these four lines are specified ("duplications", "deletions", "inversions"
or "commonVariations") the simulator simulates shotgun sequencing of
the reference genome, with no variations.

Randomly created and common variations may be combined; if the
"commonVariations" line is specified and some or all of "duplications",
"deletions" and "inversions" are also specified, the simulator will
choose the specified number of variations from the list and also create
the specified number of random variations.

When creating variations randomly, the following lines may also be
specified:

	VariationSizeRange N K

The range of sizes of the randomly created variations. N is the
minimum variation size (default 50), K is the largest size (default
1000000). Variation sizes are determined randomly with an exponentially
decreasing distribution.

	MinimumLargeVariations N

Force at least N variations of each type (i.e. at least N of the
duplications, N of the deletions and N of the inversions) to be of
the maximum size. Default is N=0, i.e. have variations of the maximum
size only if they happen to be created in the exponentially decreasing
distribution. The minimum applies only to the types being used in this
run; i.e. if only the "deletions" line is specified, then the minimum
of large variations applies only to deletions.

	HomozygousPercentage N

Percentage of randomly created variations that should be
homozygous. Default is 10, i.e. 10% of randomly created variations will
be homozygous.

SNPs

The simulator can also optionally simulate SNPs. This is done by
specifying the line

	SNPs file

The file should contains a list of SNPs; the program introduces all SNPs
in the file (or if a list of chromosomes was specified, all SNPs in the
file belonging to these chromosomes) into the reference genome before
performing the variations.

Parameters for simulated shotgun sequencing

The following parameters can be specified to control how the simulated
shotgun sequencing is performed.

	ReadLength N

Shotgun sequencing read length. Default is 35.

	readBlockDistribution file

A file containing a distribution of read-pair block sizes (inclusive of
the size of the two reads).

	readBlockSize N

Read blocks are of fixed size N.

Either "ReadBlockSize" or "readBlockDistribution" should be specified, not
both. If neither is specied, the default is a fixed size of 4000.

	coverage N

Simulate shotgun sequencing with a depth coverage of N. No default,
i.e. either this line ro "coverage carpet" must be specified.

	coverage carpet

Do carpet coverage of the entire reference genome (or if the "Chromosome" line
is specified, of all the chromosomes listed in it). Create read blocks starting at
each possible position. A maq pileup output created from this carpet coverage is
useful input to the HMM inference program, in order to properly normalize the
coverage probabilities at each position

	OppositeStrands [yes/no]

If "yes", the simulated reads are done on opposite strands; i.e. in each
mate pair the F read will be from the reference genome sequence, and
the R read will be from the opposite strand, i.e. a reverse-complement
sequence. Default is "no"; the simulated reads are done on one strand,
and all F and R reads are from the reference genome sequence.

	Quality N

Quality of the shotgun sequencing. In this version of the program,
varying quality is not implemented; all reads are done with the
same quality. Default is 20 (i.e. a .01 probability of error on each
nucleotide).

Output format parameters

The following parameters can be specified to determine the output format:

	OutputFormat format

Format is either fasta (the default) or fastq. Fastq is needed if the
output is to be given as input to maq

	OutputName S

The output files of the program will be named with string S; the read
results will be written into files named "S.read.results.n.F" and
"S.read.results.n.R", and the variations list will be written into a
file named "S.variations". If this line is omitted, the output files
will be named "read.results.n.F", "read.results.n.R", and "variations".

	ReadsPerFile N

Number of reads per output file. The reads result output is broken into
as many files as needed, each containing N reads; this parameter can
be used to make sure the output files are small enough to be handled by
Maq. If this line is not specified, the default is to write all the read
results into one output file.
