	Instructions for using the HMM CNV-from-coverage inference program
				Yufeng Shen and Eyal Mozes

The program accepts as its input a file providing coverage numbers for
each position on the genome, as a result of mapping shotgun sequencing results
with Maq. The program can either directly accept the output of "maq pileup",
or the more compact format produced by class cnv_simulation.convert_pileup (see
the runMaq command file in the Simulation folder for an example of how to
produce this file).

The command file runViterbi in this directory contains an example of how to
run the inference program. The command-line arguments to the inference program
are:

params=[param-file]	optional file containing parameters for the run. If
			not specified, defaults are used for all parameters.

pileup=[pileup-file]	mandatory argument specifying the pileup input file

segments=[segment-directory]	optional argument specifying the directory
				containing the segmented version of the
				reference genome. Used by the program to
				identify unsequenced regions of the genome
				(regions consisting of long strings of N
				in the reference sequence); mapping to such
				regions is ignored in the inference.

carpet=[carpet-file1,carpet-file2,...]	optional argument specifying one or
					more files containing the pileup
					results from carpet coverage of
					the reference sequence. Used for
					background coverage probabilities, used
					to normalize the results in the pileup
					input file.

actual=[actual-CNVs]	optional file containing the actual CNVs; if the
			input was the result of simulated sequencing, then
			we know the actual CNVs and can provide this file.

If the "actual" argument is not provided, the output of the inference program
is a list of inferred CNVs; if the "actual" argument is provided, the output
is a comparison of the inferred CNVs with the actual ones, listing all
actual CNVs that were undetected, all false positives, and, for those CNVs that
were correctly detected, the degree of overlap between the actual CNV and the
inferred one.

The parameters that can be specified in the parameters file are as follows:

		Chromosome ID1 ID2 ....

List of chromosomes for which inference should be performed; input data for
other chromosomes is ignored. By default, perform inference for all chromosomes
that appear in the input.

		duplications N

		deletions N

		averageCNVLength N

		homozygousPercentage P

Estimated total number of duplications and deletions in the chromosomes
for which the inference is performed; estimated length of each CNV; and
estimated percentage of CNVs that are homozygous. These
estimates are used in constructing the HMM transition probabilities; the
estimates need not be completely accurate, but if they are a close estimate
that will help the program create more accurate transition probabilities and
therefore better predictions.

Default values are one duplication and one deletion per 15mb; average CNV
length of 80000; and homozygous percentage of .005%.

		ReadLength N

Read length used in the sequencing that produced the pileup input file. Default
is 25.

		CarpetReadLength N

If carpet files were specified, read length used in the carpet coverage
sequencing that produced the carpet files. Default is 25. Note that the best
results are achieved when the input pileup and the carpet files were all
produced with the same read length, in which case ReadLength and
CarpetReadLength will be the same.

		OverlapThreshold P

If the actual CNVs are specified, this is the minimum overlap needed between
an actual and inferred CNV. An inferred CNV is listed as correct if it has an
overlap of at least P% with an actual CNV. Default is 60.
